On the Methodology of ISEW, GPI and related measures
====================================================

*some constructive suggestions and some doubt on the 'threshold' hypothesis*

by Eric Neumayer (2000), in Ecological Economics, (34) 347-361.


Introduction
------------ 

Since the 1990s, the construction of an Index of Sustainable Economic Welfare 
(ISEW) has become quite popular. The computation starts from personal 
consumption expenditures weighted with an index of income inequality. Then 
certain welfare relevant factors are added (e.g. household labour) and certain 
welfare-relevant losses are subtracted (e.g. cost of environmental pollution, 
costs of depletion of non-renewable resources and long-term environmental damage 
costs). The index has been criticised by some authors, but in the paper Neumayer 
aspires to put forward some constructive suggestions. He addresses three items: 

- the valuation of the depletion of non-renewable resources
- the valuation of long-term environmental damage 
- the adjustment of consumption expenditures for income inequality 

Proponents of the ISEW/GPI indices have put great emphasis on a clearly 
discernible trend of the ISEW/GPI in almost all studies undertaken so far: 
starting from around the 1970s or early 1980s depending on the country, the 
ISEW/GPI no longer rises very much or even falls, whereas GNP continues to rise. 
As an explanation for this widening gap between the two indicators, Max-Neef has 
put forward the so-called 'threshold hypothesis': for every society there seems 
to be a period in which economic growth (as conventionally measured) brings 
about an improvement in the quality of life, but only up to a point - the 
threshold point - beyond which, if there is more economic growth, quality of 
life may begin to deteriorate. The paper argues that proponents of ISEW/GPI 
consider their results too easily as evidence for the 'threshold hypothesis'. It 
suggests that as far as depletion of non-renewable resources and long-term 
environmental damage contribute to the widening gap between ISEW/GPI and GNP, 
this gap might be the artefact of highly contestable methodolical assumptions. 


Depletion of non-renewable resources
------------------------------------

There are 3 different aspects:

- 	**replacement costs**

	The rational for using this one: It stems from the idea that non-renewable 
	resource use, which cannot be prolonged forever and is therefore, not 
	sustainable into the indefinite future, would have to be replaced by
	renewable resources.
	
	2 major problems:
	
	* 	the underlying assumption is that non-renewable resource use has to be
		fully replaced by renewable resources in the present (if there are still
		available resources today that are cheaper, why fully replace them?)
	
	* 	the escalation factor assumes that replacement costs increase over time
		(reason behind: when the limits of a resource are being reached, the
		cost of extracting the next unit is more costly than the previous unit’
		and that ‘this principle presumably applies also to renewable fuels,
		although to a lesser extent - BUT: the cost of solar technology is
		expected to decrease, this falling costs should be more proper to be
		assumed)
	
	If replacement costs are not assumed to escalate by 3% per annum, no 
	widening gap between ISEW and GNP.
	
	Furthermore, methodologically correct would be the valuation of resource
	consumption, not extraction, since the rational behind this method is to 
	replace non-renewable resource use (the source of the resource is
	irrelevant).

- 	**resource rents**

	The rationale for using this method: because non-renewable resources are
	irreversibly lost in the process of use, non-renewable resource extraction
	represents the (partial) liquidation of an existing capital stock. Rental
	income that accrues from resrouces extraction is, therefore non-sustainable
	into the future and should either fully (total resource rent) or partly
	(resource user cost) be deduced.
	
- 	if total resource rent is used: **total resource rent vs resource user cost** 
	(calculated with the El Serafy method) (the latter is onyl a fraction of
	the former)
	
	El Serafy method: calculates the differences between two streams: (1) finite
	stream from the non-renewable resource, (2) infinite but lower level of the
	substitute renewable resource. Thus this method takes into account that by
	investing the income from non-renewable resources an infinite income from
	renewable can be sustained.
	
Long-term environmental damage
------------------------------

In the initial approach to ISEW/GPI, the annual nonrenwable energy resource
consumption is valued at: $0.5 in 1972 dollars and this value is deduced from 
the ISEW in this year but also in all following years. The rationale behind is:
"the funds from a $0.5 tax on a barrel equivalent non-renewable resource could
be set aside to accumulate in a non-interest-bearing account, which would be
available to compensate future generations for the long-term damage caused by
the use of fossil fuels and atomic energy".

Accumulation in the UK ISEW study is theoretically incorrect: In valuing each 
tonne of emissions with its marginal social cost, the total future damage of 
this tonne of emissions is already valued. To let this value accumulate over 
time is self-contradictory and therefore simply wrong as it leads to multiple 
counting of the total future damage. 

In the initial approach as well, accumulation leads to multiple counting,
because money for the damage caused by each unit of emissions is set aside not
only in the year of emission, but for each subsequent year as well.

Not assuming accumulation of the environmental damage yields no discrepancy 
between ISEW and GNP, but "One might think that even if long-term environmental 
damage is not accumulated over time, a threshold effect might still arise if 
marginal social costs per tonne of emitted carbon are assumed to increase over 
time". But at least for the UK ISEW, the only study so far using rising marginal 
social costs, the threshold effect fails to materialise. 

Adjustment for inequality
-------------------------

The Atkinson index should be used since using this the researcher has to
explicitly state his/her assumption on society's aversion to income inequality.
The adjusting index generated by the Gini coefficients is very ad hoc and the
researchers assumption is not explicitly explicated (base year chosen for the
index).

Furthermore, the ISEW/GPI can not be directly compared to GNP. If ISEW/GPI is 
interpreted as an index, only the changes can are meaningful, the levels are 
not. If it is interpreted as an absolute measure, then a clear statement is 
needed on the base year. Related to this point, the ISEW/GPI needs to be 
interpreted as a measure of welfare, not as sustainable or Hicksian income. 
Amongst other things, this is because, due to the indexing, the resulting 
ISEW:GPI cannot be interpreted as the income that society can safely consume and 
be as well off at the end of the year as at the beginning. 

Conclusions
-----------

(Main conclusion of the above mentioned +)

It has been shown that if no escalation factor is applied to valuing the 
depletion of non-renewable resources, and if long-term environmental damage is 
not accumulated, then none of these items contributes any longer to a widening 
gap between ISEW:GPI and GNP. One can therefore conclude from the analysis above 
that variables related to the environment do not provide evidence for the 
‘threshold hypothesis‘. This does not provide sufficient evidence against the 
‘threshold hypothesis’ in general, as other factors covered by ISEW/GPI 
might still create a widening, but smaller, gap between ISEW/GPI and GNP/GDP. 


Questions
---------

-	Based on the method used to calculate the index, it is implicitly assumed
	that physical capital is a good substitute for natural capital. If we take
	a broader definition of natural capital that includes ecosystem services 
	(which are an essential part of sustainability), does this assumption seem
	to be plausible?
	
	If the costs of using the non-renewable resource are compensated at the
	moment by increased economic activity and if we do not assume the
	accumulation of environmental costs, does this mean substitutability and
	sustainability?
	
-	With this extended definition, if we assume that physical capital can
	replace ecosystem services (e.g. climate control, water purification or
	soil formation) only for a limited extend, does the assumption of falling 
	replacement costs seem to be right?
	


