Collective Action and the Evolution of Social Norms
===================================================

by Elinor Ostrom, in the Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14 (3), 137-158p.

Introduction
------------
80
Based on Mancur Olson, the zero contribution thesis says that "[U]nless the 
number of individuals in a group is quite small, or unless there is coercion or 
some other special device to make individuals act in their common interest, 
rational, self-interested individuals will not act to achieve their common or 
group interests." However, the thesis contradicts observations of everyday life. 
Extensive fieldwork has by now established that individuals in all walks of life 
and all parts of the world voluntarily organize themselves so as to gain the 
benefits of trade, to provide mutual protection against risk, and to create and 
enforce rules that protect natural resources. 

This paper will describe both avenues of research on the underpinnings of 
collective action, first focusing on the experimental evidence and potential 
theoretical explanations, and then on the real-world empirical evidence. A 
central finding is that the world contains multiple types of individuals, some 
more willing than others to initiate reciprocity to achieve the benefits of 
collective action. Thus, a core question is how potential cooperators signal one 
another and design institutions that reinforce rather than destroy conditional 
cooperation. Evolutionary theories appear most able to explain the diverse 
findings. 

Laboratory Evidence on Rational Choice in Collective Action Situations
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Usually, political economists assume rational individuals since experiments
based on this can robustly demonstrate that microeconomic theory holds in
explaining market behaviour. However, this assumption does not yield expected
results in collective action situations - e.g. linear public good experiments
[1]_.

Since the first public good experimetns were undertake, there were many others
uner various conditions successfully replicating the following findings (which
can be considered as core facts by now):

1.	Subjects contribute between 40 and 60 percent of their endowments to the
	public good in a one-shot game as well as in the first round of finitely repeated
	games.
2.	After the first round, contribution levels tend to decay downward, but
	remain well above zero. A repeated finding is that over 70 percent of subjects
	contribute nothing in the announced last round of a finitely repeated sequence.
3.	Those who believe others will cooperate in social dilemmas are more likely
	to cooperate themselves. A rational egoist in a public good game, however, should
	not in any way be affected by a belief regarding the contribution levels of others.
	The dominant strategy is a zero contribution no matter what others do.
4.	In general, learning the game better tends to lead to more cooperation, not
	less.
5.	Face-to-face communication in a public good game-as well as in other
	types of social dilemmas-produces substantial increases in cooperation that
	are sustained across all periods including the last period. The strong
	effect of communication is not consistent with currently accepted 
	theory, because verbal agreements in these experiments are not enforced.
6.	When the structure of the game allows it, subjects will expend personal
	resources to punish those who make below-average contributions to a
	collective benefit, including the last period of a finitely repeated game.
7.	The rate of contribution to a public good is affected by various contextual
	factors including the framing of the situation and the rules used for assigning
	participants, increasing competition among them, allowing communication, authorizing
	sanctioning mechanisms, or allocating benefits.
	
These facts are hard to explain using the standard theory that all individuals
who face the same objective game structure evaluate decisions in the same way!

Building a Theory of Collective Action with Multiple Types of Players
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Assuming two types of "norm-using" (conditional cooperators and willing 
punishers) players is useful. Conditional cooperators are individuals who are 
willing to initiate cooperative action when they estimate others will 
reciprocate and to repeat these actions as long as a sufficient proportion of 
the others involved reciprocate. Conditional cooperators are the source of the 
relatively high levels of contributions in one-shot or initial rounds of 
prisoner's dilemma and public good games. [2]_

The first four findings are consistent with an assumption that conditional 
cooperators are involved in most collective action situations. Knowing the 
number of repetitions will be relatively long, conditional cooperators can 
restrain their disappointment with free riders and keep moderate levels of 
cooperation (and joint payoffs) going for ever-longer periods of time. The fifth 
and sixth findings depend on the presence of a third type of player who is 
willing, if given an opportunity, to punish presumed free riders through verbal 
rebukes or to use costly material payoffs when available. 

Together, conditional cooperators and willing punishers create a more robust 
opening for collective action and a mechanism for helping it grow. When allowed 
to communicate on a face-to-face basis, willing punishers convey a considerable 
level of scorn and anger toward others who have not fully reciprocated their 
trust and give substantial positive encouragement when cooperation rates are 
high. Even more important for the long-term sustainability of collective action 
is the willingness of some to pay a cost to sanction others. 

How could these norm-using types of players have emerged and survived in a world
of rational egoists?

Emergence and Survival of Multiple Types of Players in Evolutionary Processes
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

In a strict evolutionary model, individuals inherit strategies and do not change 
strategies in their lifetime. In this approach, those carrying the more 
successful strategies for an environment reproduce at a higher rate. 

Evolutionary psychologists who study the cognitive structure of the human brain 
conclude that humans do not develop general analytical skills that are then 
applied to a variety of specific problems. Rather, the human brain appears to 
have evolved a domain-specific, human-reasoning architecture. The deontic effect 
in human reasoning has repeatedly been detected even in children as young as 
three years old and is not associated with overall intelligence or educational 
level of the subject. Thus, **recent developments in evolutionary theory and
supporting empirical research provide strong support for the assumption that
modern humans have inherited a propensity to learn social norms**, similar to
our inherited propensity to learn grammatical rules.

The Indirect Evolutionary Approach to Adaptation Through Experience
-------------------------------------------------------------------

Recent work on an indirect evolutionary approach [3]_ to the study of human
behavior offers a rigorous theoretical approach for understanding how preferences-
including those associated with social norms-evolve or adapt. An indirect
evolutionary approach explains how a mnixture of norm-users and rational egoists
would emerge in settings where standard rational choice theory assumes the
presence of rational egoists alone.

In this approach, social norms may lead individuals to behave differently in the
same objective situation depending on how strongly they value conformance with
(or deviance from) a norm. With complete information regarding types, conditional
cooperators playing a trustworthy strategy will more frequently receive the
higher payoff, while rational egoists will consistently receive a lower payoff,
since others will not trust them. Only the trustworthy type would survive in an evolutionary process with complete information. 386). Viewed as a cultural
evolutionary process, new entrants to the population would be more likely to
adopt the preference ordering of those who obtained the higher material payoffs
in the immediate past.

If there is no information about player types for a relatively large population, 
preferences will evolve so that only rational egoists survive. On the other hand,
if there is a noisy signal about a player's type that is at least more accurate
than random, trustworthy types will survive as a substantial proportion of the
population.

Evidence Testing the Indirect Evolutionary Approach
---------------------------------------------------

An indirect evolutionary approach is able to explain how a mixture of contingent 
cooperators and rational egoists would emerge in settings where traditional game 
theory predicts that only rational egoists should prevail. Findings confirms 
that not all players enter a collective action situation as pure forward-looking 
rational egoists who make decisions based solely on individual outcomes. Some 
bring with them a set of norms and values that can support cooperation. 
In a one-shot, sequential, double-blind prisoner's dilemma experiment,
the norms supporting cooperation and reciprocity were diminished, but not
eliminated by experience, although preferences on the outcomes suggested that
social norms supporting cooperation were present.

Based on Cain (1998), nice players chose cooperation in the prisoner's dilemma
game 69% of the time when they were paired with other nice players and 39%
of the time when they were paired with and introduced to stingy players.

Finally, interesting experimental (as well as field) evidence has accumulated 
that externally imposed rules tend to "crowd out" endogenous cooperative 
behavior. The removal of the external mechanism "seemed to undermine subsequent 
cooperation and leave the group worse off than those in the control group who 
had played a regular . .. prisoner's dilemma in both cases with face-to-face 
communication. Studies show that communication between the parties can work as 
well or nearly as well at generating cooperative behaviour as an externally 
imposed set of rules and system of monitoring and sanctioning. Moreover, norms 
seem to have a certain staying power in encouraging a growth of the desire for 
cooperative behavior over time, while cooperation enforced by externally imposed 
rules can disappear very quickly. Finally, the worst of all worlds may be one 
where external authorities impose rules but are only able to achieve weak 
monitoring and sanctioning. 

The Evolution of Rules and Norms in the Field
---------------------------------------------

Field studies identified numerous contextual variable that are either conductive
or detrimental to endogenous collective action. [4]_
A frequent finding is that when the users of a common-pool resource organize 
themselves to devise and enforce some of their own basic rules, they tend to 
manage local resources more sustainably than when rules are externally imposed 
on them.

The Emergence of Self-Organized Collective Action
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If a small core group of users willing to restrict their own use of a common 
pool resource identify each other, they can begin a process of cooperation 
without having to devise a full-blown organization with all of the rules that 
they might eventually need to sustain cooperation over time. The presence of a 
leader or entrepreneur, who articulates different ways of organizing to improve 
joint outcomes, is frequently an important initial stimulus. 

Design Principles of Long-Surviving, Self-Organized Resource Regimes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Successful self-organized resource regimes can initially draw upon locally
evolved norms of reciprocity and trustworthiness and the likely presence of local
leaders in most community settings. But there are clear design principles that
improve the survival of the resource regime.

**clear boundary rules**
	Using this principle enables participants to know who is in and who
	is out of a defined set of relationships and thus with whom to cooperate.
**restriction and benefit distribution**
	The second design principle is that the local rules-in-use restrict the 
	amount, timing, and technology of harvesting the resource; allocate benefits
	proportional to required inputs; and are crafted to take local conditions
	into account. Well-tailored rules help to account for the perseverance of
	the resource itself. If some users get all the benefits and pay few of the
	costs, others become unwilling to follow rules over time.
**democractic rule forming**
	The third design principle is that most of the individuals affected by a
	resource regime can participate in making and modifying their rules. 
	Resource regimes that use this principle are both able to tailor better
	rules to local circumstances and to devise rules that are considered fair by
	participants. People who violate these rules suffer not only a loss
	of favor from the animals (important in the Cree ideology of hunting) but
	also social disgrace." Fair rules of distribution help to build trusting
	relationships, since more individuals are willing to abide by these rules
	because they participated in their design and also because they meet shared
	concepts of fairness.
**selection and transparency of monitoring**
	The fourth design principle is that most long-surviving resource
	regimes select their own monitors, who are accountable to the users or are
	users themselves and who keep an eye on resource conditions as well as on
	user behavior.
**graduated sanctions**
	that depend on the seriousness and context of the offense. With the former
	priciple, the regime does not have to rely only on willing punishers to
	impose personal costs on those who break a rule. On the other hand, the
	initial sanctions that are imposed are often so low as to have no impact
	on an expected benefit-cost ratio of breaking local rules. Rather, the
	initial sanction needs to be considered more as information both to the
	person who is "caught" and to others in the community. Rule infractions,
	however, can generate a downward cascade of cooperation in a group that
	relies only on conditional cooperation and has no capacity to sanction.
	A real threat to the continuance of self-organized regimes occurs, however,
	if some participants break rules repeatedly.
**resolution of conflicts**
	the importance of access to rapid, low-cost, local arenas to resolve
	conflict among users or between users and officials. Also, mechanisms to
	clarify, discuss and resolve the rules and the infractions are necessary.
**legislative recognition**
	The capability of local users to develop an ever-more effective regime over time
	is affected by whether they have minimal recognition of the right to organize by a
	national or local government. (unanimity vs non-unanimity)
**the presence of governance activities**
	When common pool resources are somewhat larger, an eighth design
	principle tends to characterize successful systems-the presence of governance
	activities organized in multiple layers of nested enterprises.
	
Threats to Sustained Collective Action
--------------------------------------

Here we will concentrate on
those factors that affect the distribution of types of participants within a regime and
the strength of the norms of trust and reciprocity held by participants. 

Major migration (out of or into an area) is always a threat that may or may not 
be countered effectively. Out-migration may change the economic viability of a 
regime due to loss of those who contribute needed resources. In-migration may 
bring new participants who do not trust others and do not rapidly learn social 
norms that have been established over a long period of time. 

Other exogenous and endogenous factors identified by the literature: 1) efforts 
by national governments to impose a single set of rules on all governance units 
in a region; 2) rapid changes in technology, in factor availability, and in 
reliance on monetary transactions; 3) transmission failures from one generation 
to the next of the operational principles on which self-organized governance is 
based; 4) turning to external sources of help too frequently; 5) international 
aid that does not take account of indigenous knowledge and institutions; 6) 
growth of corruption and other forms of opportunistic behavior; and 7) a lack of 
large-scale institutional arrangements that provide fair and low-cost resolution 
mechanisms for conflicts. 

Questions
---------




	
.. [1]	In a linear public good experiment, each individual is endowed with a 
		fixed set of assets and must decide how many of these assets to
		contribute to a public good. In this setting, the optimal outcome for
		the group of players as a whole is for everyone to contribute all of
		their endowments to provide the public good. However, the unique
		equilibrium for rational egoists in a single-shot game is 
		that everyone contributes zero, since each individual has access to
		benefits of the public good funded by the contributions of others,
		without paying any costs.	
..	[2] Conditional cooperators tend to vary, however, in their tolerance for
		free riding.
..	[3] In an indirect evolutionary model, players receive objective payoffs,
		but make decisions based on the transformation of these material 
		rewards into intrinsic preferences. Those who value reciprocity, 
		fairness, and being trustworthy add a subjective change parameter 
		to actions (of themselves or others) that are consistent or not 
		consistent with their norms. This approach allows individuals to 
		start with a predisposition to act in a certain way, but it also 
		allows those preferences to adapt in a relatively short number of 
		iterations given the objective payoffs they receive and their 
		intrinsic preferences about those payoffs. 
..	[4]	the type of production and allocation functions; the predictability of resource
		flows; the relative scarcity of the good; the size of the group 
		involved; the heterogeneity of the group; the dependence of the 
		group on the good; common understanding of the group; the size of 
		the total collective benefit; the marginal contribution by one 
		person to the collective good; the size of the temptation to free 
		ride; the loss to cooperators when others do not cooperate; 
		having a choice of participating or not; the presence of 
		leadership; past experience and level of social capital; the 
		autonomy to make binding rules; and a wide diversity of rules 
		that are used to change the structure of the situation 


