Perpetual and structural barriers to investing in natural capital
=================================================================

*Economics from an ecological footprint perspective*

by Mathis Wackernagel, William E. Rees (1997) in Ecological Economics (20) 3-24.


Introduction: natural capital as appropriated carrying capacity
--------------------------------------------------------------- 

The paper argues that perceptual distortions and prevailing economic 
rationality, far from encouraging investment in natural capital, actually 
accelerate the depletion of natural capital stocks. THe paper builds on a more 
ecologically complete definition that would include not only all the biophysical 
resources and waste sinks needed to support the human economy, but also the 
relationship among those entities and processes that provide life support to the 
ecosphere (e.g. the fish stock is the natural capital, the sustainable harvest 
is natural income). Natural capital is the totality of renewable and 
non-renewable natural capital, and this paper uses a biophysical approach to 
aggregate its various forms. Thus natural capital is not just an inventory of 
resources; it includes all those components of the ecospehere and the structural 
relationships among them, whose organizational integrity is essential for the 
continuous self-production of the system itself. 

The constant capital stocks criterion
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The authors subscribe to the precautionary principle that each generation should 
inherit a stock of essential biophysical asset alone no less that the stock of 
such assets inherited by the previous generation. [1]_ This interpretation 
emphasizes ecological necessity, particularly the life-support functions of 
self-producing biophysical capital. Emphasis is on the pragmatic minimal 
biophysical requirements for humane survival. On the other hand, the 
preservation of biophysical assets essential to humankind does imply the direct 
protection of whole ecosystems and thousands of keystone species, and thousands 
more will benefit indirectly from the maintenance of the same systems upon which 
humans are dependent. 

The next steps are to determine how to best measure constancy of natural 
capital, or in other words, how the various forms of natural capital can be 
aggregated. Using money values as measure of natural capital constancy is 
misleading from an ecological perspective precisely because a constant (or 
increasing) dollar value of a resource stock can result from the physical 
depletion of the stock (and its functions). Monetary measure can foster the 
illusion of constant stocks while physical inventories actually shrink. More 
fundamentally, prices can say nothing all about non-market, but ecologically 
essential, stocks and processes (e.g. the ozone layer and photosynthetic CO2 
uptake), nor about those ecosystem functions whose value to humankind is not 
revealed until they are in jeopardy or disappear. 

To summarize, an economy depends on natural capital to provide all the resource 
flows and waste sinks necessary to sustain a given material standard of living, 
while simultaneously maintaining the functional integrity and productivity of 
the stocks themselves.

The ecological footprint and appropriated carrying capacity
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The first approximation, the ecological footprint can be represented as the 
aggregate area of land and water in various ecological categories that is 
claimed by participants in that economy to produce all the resources they 
consume, and to absorb all their wastes they generate on a continuous basis, 
using prevailing technology. Evidently, the area of the footprint depends on the 
population size, material living standards, technology and ecological 
productivity. 

It is useful to think of the essential self-producing natural capital 
represented by an economy's ecological footprint as 'Hicksian natural capital.' 
Hicksian income is the level of consumption that can be sustained from one 
period to the next without reducing wealth. In the present context this 
corresponds to 'natural income.' For a given economy, the Hicksian natural 
capital would therefore be the aggregate natural capital stocks necessary to 
sustain this economy's ecological flows (natural income) and consumption 
patterns indefinitely. 

Estimates of the ecological footprint and appropriated carrying capacity provide 
clear direction for action. THey indicate whether current or projected 
consumption levels can be sustained by available ecological productivity. the 
ecological footprint becomes a useful yardstick for sustainability. As the 
ecological footprint of humanity needs to be smaller than the available carrying 
capacity, it becomes an absolute benchmark. It also points out how the 
ecological footprint can be reduced: through lower population, lower 
consumption, more efficient technologies (as long as gains are not re-spent), 
higher ecological productivity, or a combination of these four parameters. 

Rough calculations suggest that the ecological footprint of all industrialized nations, representing less than 20% of the world population, is larger than the available ecologically productive land on Earth. The data indicate that it is simply not possible, ecologically or thermodynamically, for everybody in the world to consume at current industrial levels without risking irreversible resource depletion and ecospheric collapse.

A taxonomy of barriers to investing in natural capital
------------------------------------------------------

Given the unquestioned monetary value of many ecological goods and the fact that 
certain ecological services are essential for life, why does humankind not even 
maintain, let alone invest, in natural capital stocks? 

Four main classes of reasons are identified:

*Ignorance, fundamental beliefs and denial*:
	Decision-makers understand neither the nature of the problem nor the crucial
	role of natural capital stocks. Others who do understnad are in denial, or 
	are unwilling or incapable of taking necessary action.
	
*Economic abstraction, deviant operating models and knowledge*:
	Socio-economic abstractions are barriers to investment in natural capital
	because they bear little relation to ecological reality.

*The social mimicry of individual rationality*:
	A global economic regime is being created in which what has become accepted as `rational` economic behaviour by individuals is ever more being emulated
	at higher organizational scales at the expense of public goods and communal
	values.

*Physical and structural manifestations of modern society*:
	The pysical separation between consumption and production, further reliance
	on electronic media rather than direct experience, the fast-paced
	integration of the global economy, energy intensive settlements
	infrastructure and the loss of local political autonomy reduce corrective 
	feedback for the maintenance of natural capital and amplify the dilemma
	between economic expansion and ecological integrity.

The reality today is that much deterioration of the global 'commons' can be 
attributed to the unforeseen consequences of deliberate policies that extend 
self-interested individualistic behaviour and rights to government and 
inter-overnment agencies, transnational corporations, and various other 
multinational organizations operating in the global arena. Examples include 
international agreements for the division and exploitation of the sea-bed and 
similar 'undeveloped' common-pool resources. 

Current global development models implicitly assume an infinite world. 
Unfortunately, the real world is finite and the invisible hand of the market has 
nothing to say about the appropriate scale fo an entropic economy operating 
under such a constraint. 

To argue that globalism and self-interested individual behavior is a dominant 
factor in the depletion of natural capital is to underscore a particularly 
pernicious form of market failure. In a finite, materially-closed system like 
the ecosphere, the competitive forces guiding the invisible hand become 
positively destructive. Not all individuals, corporations, and nations can 
simultaneously maximize their individual use of global sources and sinks without 
over-exploiting or destroying the common-pool life-support functions that are 
fessential to their mutual survival. It is conceivable that some market failures
actually reduce natural capital depletion by compromising an economy's aggregate
purchasing power and reducing material consumption.

Exploring four issues in more detail
------------------------------------

Marginal pricing and economic valuation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The beauty - as well as the danger - of market prices is that they seem to maker 
resoruces commensurate, enabling us to trade apples for oranges. It reveals only 
what people are willing to pay today for the next unit of that commodity. This 
price is influenced by many things including total income, available 
alternatives (opportunity costs) and current fashion. Accordingly, market 
pricing can often equate the terminally frivolous to the absolutely essential. 

If we value bioproductivity only by its dollar price at the margin, we are 
completely misled about the magnitude of nature's contribution to human welfare. 
However, these figures reflect neither the necessity for agriculture nor its 
true relative worth compared to the information sector. 

In short, marginal prices for the products of natural capital convey a sense 
that nature's total value is finite, when, in fact, ecological necessity 
dictates that the total social utility of many forms of natural capital is 
infinite: without water, no life; without air, no life; without photosynthesis, 
no life, etc. 

Interregional risk pooling
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Generally, economist argue that risk-pooling is beneficial to individuals and, 
therefore, also for society. If individuals are too risk-averse, they miss 
opportunities, misallocate resources, or under-consume. However, pooling risks 
can have ecological draw-backs. 

For example, coastal communities whose survival is dependent on traditional 
fisheries generally evolve harvest strategies that conserve fish stocks. Only 
when they acquire the option of pooling risks with the outside through accessing 
other regions' carrying capacity and moving their capital elsewhere do they 
adopt more aggressive fishing strategies that could lead to resource exhaustion. 
Having access to others' resources effectively reduces the perceived present 
value of local natural capital. Because extinction of the local stock no longer 
immediately endangers survival or the local economy, it may even make economic 
sense to exploit that stock unsustainably and to invest the returns in a more 
profitable venture elsewhere. 

Trade and limiting factors
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It is apparent that natural capital is once again more likely to impose limits
on the scale of economy than are labour shortages. This makes the ecological
'Law of Minimum' and the concept of appropriated carrying capacity essential to
any interpretation of the sustainability implications of international trade.
The 'Law of Minimum', that systems and processes are governed by that single
necessary factor in the last supply, led to the use of more specific fertilizers
in agriculture. Howeverm there are ecological drawbacks. In nature, limiting
factors serve inadvertently to regulate production systems. THe shortage of
only one essential requirement prevents plant growth from exhausting the entire
resource base. The effect of chemical fertilization, therefore, is to accelerate
the depletion of successive components of the soil, a potentially renwable
form of natural capital, while creating dependencies on non-renewable,
manufactured capital.

Unfortunately, unregualted trade acts like excessive fertilizer: it can
short-circuit ecological fuses which historically kept economic throughput in
balance with local bioproductivity. Most economists explicitly support
unrestricted trade precisely because it enables local economies to overcome
any material barriers to growth. The growth of economies most likely entails
higher populations, greater resources throughputs, accelerated stock depletion,
and intensified pollution. The questions is, at what point do their people
cease being better off than before? Each economy is still contained by a second
limiting factor, and in addition is now dependent on an essential resource
supplied by another economy. TO this extent the gains are only transitional:
a short period of economic growth during which distributional conflicts are
eased.

Global economic integration have ecological consequences: (1) material growth 
anywhere nefverssarily increases the throughput of energy and matrial
resources, including those which have not historically been limiting; (2) it
exposes all local resoruce stocks to the largest possible market; (3) trade acts
as a special case of risk-pooling.

The net effect is becoming self-evident in the modern world. Surplus' natural 
capital stocks everywhere are drawn down and global sinks are filled to 
over-flowing. Our global safety net is being shredded as the 'Tragedy of the
Commons' is played out on a global scale. 

Efficiency
~~~~~~~~~~

Many economists and environmentalists believe that advances in technological
efficieny is a potential panacea for the global crisis. As effective as
theses trategies might seem on the micro sale, however, increasing the ratio
between output and input does not necessarily lead to lower resource use. On the
contrary, technological efficiency may actually lead to increased net
consumption of resources. Lester Brown et al. (1991, 81) states that "continuing
growth in material consumption will eventually overwhelm gains from efficiency,
causing total resource use to rice".

-	On the micro-level:

	imroved energy or material efficiency may enable firms to raise wages,
	increase dividens, or lower prices, all of which may lead to higher net
	consumption. Similarly, technology-induced savings by individuals are
	usually redrected to other forms of consumption, canceling some of the
	initial	gain.
	
-	On the meso (or regional) level:
	
	The money for both the energy-saving equipment as well as the amounts
	saved through improved energy efficiency will more likely be spent locally,
	thus stimulating the local economy.
	
-	On the macro-level:

	Empirical "results imply that the link between economic activity and energy
	use is stronger than believed by most neoclassical economists."
	
	*	technical innovation:
		
		"energy efficiency gains can increase energy consumption by two means:
		(1) by making energy appear effectively cheaper than other inputs; (2)
		by increasing economic growth, which pull up energy use."
		
	*	technical efficiency:
	
		Profitable efficiency gains contribute to upward-trending expectations
		of returns to capital, accelerated growth, and increased demand for
		resources. Overall, innovation stimulated by competition generally
		accelerates global economic performance and with it, entropic throughput.
		
	Efficiency gains far from conserving natural capital or decreasing
	footprints leads to higher consumption.
	
Implications for investing in natural capital
---------------------------------------------

Only with economic theories that are grounded in an understanding of biophysical 
flows, and of stocks necessary to secure these flows, will we be able to accept 
the economic necessity to invest in natural capital, and by that maintain its 
capacity. The question then becomes how we will be able to provide these basic
securities for human survival. We face a difficult choice:

-	Either we continue on our current path:
	
	which is bad: prevailing econmic logic and development strategies discourage
	investment in natural capital (they reinfroce the primacy of human-made
	capital over natural capital because the former 'reproduces' faster than the
	latter). Investment has become the opposite of conservation and ultimately
	threatens human welfare. People everywhere are faced with a complex
	paradox: the dominant strategy promises to enhance human welfare, but
	increasingly seems responsible for eroding it.

-	Or we recognize the need to change direction:

	Realizing that: [...]



Questions
---------

AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA
	


.. [1]	Adequate natural capital stocks are needed to maintain sufficient
		ecological flows for the human economy. And, growing populations would
		need to translate in reducing economic inputs per capita.